
Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Early Candiana Online. See
      http://www.canadiana.org/ECO/ItemRecord/68246?id=6575f86ccff5dee3


      +--------------------------------------------------------------+
      | Transcriber's Note:                                          |
      |                                                              |
      | This is a very old document which contains inconsistent and  |
      | unusual spelling. While most of the unusual spelling has     |
      | been preserved, a number of obvious typographical errors     |
      | have been corrected. For a complete list, please see the     |
      | end of this document.                                        |
      |                                                              |
      | The illustration mentioned on the Frontispiece has been      |
      | lost.                                                        |
      |                                                              |
      +--------------------------------------------------------------+





DIRECTIONS
For Navigating on Part of the
South Coast of Newfoundland,
WITH
A CHART thereof,
Including the ISLANDS of
St. PETER's and MIQUELON,
And a particular ACCOUNT of the
Bays, Harbours, Rocks, Land-Marks, Depths of Water,
Latitudes, Bearings, and Distances from Place to Place,
the Setting of the Currents, and Flowing of the
Tides, _&c._

From an actual SURVEY, taken by Order of

Commodore PALLISSER, Governor of _Newfoundland_,
_Labradore_, &c.

By JAMES COOK,

Surveyor of _Newfoundland_.







LONDON:

Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by J. MOUNT and T. PAGE on
_Tower-Hill_, M,DCC,LXVI.

[Illustration]




DIRECTIONS

FOR

Navigating on Part of the South Coast of _NEWFOUNDLAND_.


N.B. _All Bearings and Courses hereafter-mentioned, are the true
Bearings and Courses, and not by Compass._

[Sidenote: Cape Chapeaurouge.]

Cape _Chapeaurouge_, or the Mountain of the _Red Hat_, is situated on
the West side of _Placentia Bay_, in the Latitude of 46Â° 53' North,
and lies nearly West 17 or 18 Leagues from Cape St. _Maries_; it is
the highest and most remarkable Land on that Part of the Coast,
appearing above the rest something like the Crown of a Hat, and may be
seen in clear Weather 12 Leagues.

[Sidenote: Harbours of St. Laurence]

Close to the Eastward of Cape _Chapeaurouge_ are the Harbours of
_Great_ and _Little St. Laurence_. To sail into _Great St. Lawrence_,
which is the Westermost, there is no Danger but what lies very near
the Shore; taking Care with Westerly, and particularly S.W. Winds, not
to come too near the _Hat Mountain_, to avoid the Flerrys and Eddy
Winds under the high Land. The Course in is first N.W. till you open
the upper Part of the Harbour, then N.N.W. half W. The best Place for
great Ships to Anchor, and the best Ground is before a Cove on the
East-side of the Harbour in 13 Fathom Water. A little above _Blue
Beach Point_, which is the first Point on the West-side; here you lie
only two Points open: You may Anchor any where between this Point and
the Point of _Low Beach_, on the same Side near the Head of the
Harbour, observing that close to the West Shore, the Ground is not so
good as on the other Side. Fishing Vessels lay at the Head of the
Harbour above the Beach, sheltered from all Winds.

To sail into _Little St. Laurence_ you must keep the West Shore on
Board, in order to avoid a sunken Rock which lies a little without the
Point of the _Peninsula_, which stretches off from the East-side of
the Harbour: You Anchor above this _Peninsula_, (which covers you from
the Sea Winds) in 3 and 4 Fathom Water, a fine sandy Bottom. In these
Harbours are good Fishing Conveniencies, and plenty of Wood and Water.
Ships may Anchor without the _Peninsula_ in 12 Fathom good Ground, but
open to the S.S.E. Winds.

[Sidenote: Sauker Head.]

_Sauker-Head_ lies 3 Miles to the Eastward of Cape _Chapeaurouge_, it
is a pretty high round Point, off which lie some sunken Rocks, about a
Cable's Length from the Shore.

[Sidenote: Garden Bank]

This Bank whereon is from 7 to 17 Fathom Water, lies about half a Mile
off from _Little St. Laurence_, with _Blue Beach Point_ on with the
East Point of _Great St. Laurence_.

[Sidenote: Ferryland Head.]

_Ferryland head_ lies S.W. 1 Mile from Cape _Chapeaurouge_, it is a
high rocky Island, just seperated from the Main; it and Cape
_Chapeaurouge_ are sufficient Marks to know the Harbours of St.
_Laurence_.

[Sidenote: Bay of Laun.]

West 5 Miles from _Ferryland-Head_, lies the Bay of _Laun_, in the
Bottom of which are two small Inlets, called _Great_ and _Little
Laun_. _Little Laun_, which is the Eastermost, lies open to the S.W.
Winds, which generally prevails upon this Coast, and therefore no
Place to Anchor in. _Great Laun_ lies in about N. by E. 2 Miles, is
near half a Mile wide, whereon is from 14 to 3 Fathom Water. To sail
into it, you must be careful to avoid a sunken Rock, which lies about
a quarter of a Mile off from the East Point. The best Place to Anchor
is on the East-side, about half a Mile from the Head, in 6 and 5
Fathom; the Bottom is pretty good, and you are shelter'd from all
Winds, except S. and S. by W. which blow right in, and cause a great
swell. At the Head of this Place is a Bar Harbour, into which Boats
can go at half Tide; and Conveniences for a Fishery, and plenty of
Wood and Water.

[Sidenote: Laun Islands.]

Off the West Point of _Laun Bay_ lay the Islands of the same Name, not
far from the Shore; the Westermost and outermost of which lie W.
Southerly 10 Miles from _Ferryland-head_; near a quarter of a Mile to
the Southward of this Island is a Rock whereon the Sea breaks in very
bad Weather: There are other sunken Rocks about these Islands, but
they are no ways Dangerous, being very near the Shore.

[Sidenote: Taylor's Bay.]

This Bay which lies open to the Sea, lies 3 Miles to the Westward of
_Laun_ Islands; off the East Point are some sunken Rocks near a
quarter of a Mile from the Shore.

[Sidenote: Point Aux Gaul.]

A little to the Westward of _Taylors Bay_ there stretches out a low
Point of Land, called _Point Aux Gaul_; off which lies a Rock above
Water, half a Mile from the Shore, called _Gaul Shag Rock_; this Rock
lies West three quarters South 5 Leagues from _Ferryland-Head_, you
have 14 Fathom close to the off Side of it, but between it and the
Point are some sunken Rocks.

[Sidenote: Lamelin Bay.]

From _Point Aux Gaul Shag Rock_, to the Islands of _Lamelin_ is West
three quarters N. 1 League, between them is the Bay of _Lamelin_,
wherein is very shallow Water, and several small Islands, and Rocks
both above and under Water, and in the Bottom of it is a Salmon River.

[Sidenote: Lamelin Islands.]

The two Islands of _Lamelin_ (which are but low) lie off the West
Point of the Bay of the same Name, and lie West three quarters South,
6 Leagues from the Mountain of the _Red Hat_; but in steering along
Shore make a W. by S. Course good, will carry you clear of all Danger.
Small Vessels may Anchor in the Road between these Islands in 4 and 5
Fathom, tolerably well shelter'd from the Weather: Nearly in the
Middle of the Passage going in between the two Islands, is a sunken
Rock, which you avoid by keeping nearer to one Side than the other,
the most Room is on the East-side. The Eastermost Island communicates
with the Main at Low-water, by a narrow Beach, over which Boats can go
at High-water, into the N.W. Arm of _Lamelin Bay_, where they lay in
safety. Here are Conveniences for a Fishery, but little or no Wood of
any Sort. Near to the South Point of the Westermost Island is a Rock
pretty high above Water, called _Lamelin Shag Rock_; in going into the
Road between the Islands, you leave this Rock on your Larboard Side.

[Sidenote: Lamelin Ledges.]

These Ledges lay along the Shore, between _Lamelin Islands_ and _Point
May_, which is 3 Leagues, and are very Dangerous, some of them being 3
Miles from the Land. To avoid these Ledges in the Day-time, you must
not bring the Islands of _Lamelin_ to the Southward of East, until
_Point May_, or the Western extremity of the Land bear N. by E. from
you; you may then steer to the Northward with safety, between _Point
May_ and _Green Island_. In the Night, or foggy Weather, you ought to
be very careful not to approach these Ledges within 30 Fathom Water,
least you get intangled amongst them. Between them and the Main are
various Soundings from 16 to 5 Fathom.

[Sidenote: Observations.]

All the Land about Cape _Chapeaurouge_ and _Laun_, is high and hilly
close to the Sea; from _Laun Islands_ to _Lamelin_ it is of a moderate
Height; from _Lamelin_ to _Point May_, the Land near the Shore is very
low, with sandy Beaches, but a little way inland are Mountains.

[Sidenote: Island of St. Peter's.]

The Island of St. _Peter_'s lies in the Latitude 46 Degrees 46 Minutes
North. West by South near 12 Leagues from Cape _Chapeaurouge_, and
West by South half South 5 Leagues from the Islands of _Lamelin_; it
is about 5 Leagues in circuit, and pretty high, with a craggy, broken,
uneven Surface. Coming from the Westward, as soon as you raise
_Gallantry Head_, which is the South Point of the Island, it will make
in a round Hommock like a small Island and appears if seperated from
St. _Peter_'s. On the East-side of the Island, a little to the N.E.
of _Gallentry-Head_ lay three small Islands, the innermost of which is
the largest, called _Dog-Island_; within this Island is the Road and
Harbour of St. _Peter_'s; the Harbour is but small, and hath in it
from 12 to 20 Feet Water; but there is a Bar across the Entrance,
whereon there is but 6 Feet at Low-water, and 12 or 14 Feet at
High-water. The Road which lies on the N.W. Side of _Dog-Island_ will
admit Ships of any Burthen, but it is only fit for the Summer Season,
being open to the N.E. Winds; you may lay in 8, 10, and 12 Fathom, and
for the most Part is a hard rocky Bottom, there is very little clear
Ground; Ships of War commonly Buoy their Cables; the best Ground is
near the North Shore. Going in or out, you must not rainge too near
the East-side of _Boar-Island_, which is the Eastermost of the three
Islands above-mentioned, for fear of some sunken Rocks which lie East
about 1 Mile from it, and which is the only Danger about St.
_Peter_'s, but what lay very near the Shore.

[Sidenote: Island of Columbo.]

This Island is of a small circuit, but pretty high, and lies very near
the N.E. Point of St. _Peter_'s; between them is a very good Passage,
one-third of a Mile wide, wherein is 12 Fathom Water. On the
North-side of the Island is a Rock pretty high above Water, called
_Little Columbo_; and about a quarter of a Mile N.E. from this Rock is
a sunken Rock, whereon is 2 Fathom Water.

[Sidenote: Island of Langley.]

The Island of _Langley_, which lies on the N.W. Side of St. _Peter_'s,
is about 8 Leagues in Circuit, of a moderate and pretty equal height,
except the N. end, wich is a low Point with Sand Hills along it; it is
flat a little way off the low Land on both Sides of it, but all the
high Part of the Island is very bold too, and the Passage between it
and St. _Peter_'s (which is 1 League broad) is clear of Danger. You
may Anchor on the N.E. Side of the Island, a little to the Southward
of the _Sand Hills_, in 5 and 6 Fathom, a fine sandy Bottom, sheltered
from the Southerly, S.W. and N.W. Winds.

[Sidenote: Island of Miquelon.]

From the North Point of _Langley_, to the South Point of _Miquelon_ is
about 1 Mile; it is said that a few Years since they join'd together
at this Place by a Neck of Sand, which the Sea has wash'd away and
made a Channel, wherein is 2 Fathom Water. The Island of _Miquelon_ is
4 Leagues in Length from North to South, but of an unequal Breadth;
the Middle of the Island is high Land, called the high Land of _Dunn_;
but down by the Shore it is low, except Cape _Miquelon_, which is a
lofty Promontory at the Northern extremity of the Island.

[Sidenote: Dunn Harbour.]

On the S.E. Side of the Island, to the Southward of the high Land, is
a pretty large Bar-Harbour, called _Dunn Harbour_, which will admit
Fishing Shallops at half Flood, but can never be of any Utility for a
Fishery.

[Sidenote: Miquelon Rocks and Bank.]

_Miquelon Rocks_ stretches off from the East Point of the Island,
under the high Land 1 Mile and a quarter to the Eastward, some are
above and some under Water; the outermost of these Rocks are above
Water, and you have 12 Fathom close to them, and 18 and 20 Fathom 1
Mile off. N.E. half N. 4 or 5 Miles from these Rocks lie _Miquelon
Bank_ whereon is 6 Fathom Water.

[Sidenote: Road of Miquelon.]

The Road of _Miquelon_ (which is large and spacious) lies at the
North-end, and on the East-side of the Island, between Cape _Miquelon_
and a very remarkable round Mountain near the Shore, called
_Chapeaux_: Off the South Point of the Road are some sunken Rocks,
about a quarter of a Mile from the Shore, but every where else it is
clear of Danger. The best Anchorage is near the Bottom of the Road in
6 and 7 Fathom, fine sandy Bottom; you lay open to the Easterly Winds,
which Winds seldom blow in the Summer.

[Sidenote: Cape Miquelon.]

Cape _Miquelon_, or the Northern extremity of the Island is high bluff
Land; and when you are 4 or 5 Leagues to the Eastward or Westward of
it, you would take it for an Island, by reason the Land at the Bottom
of the Road is very low.

[Sidenote: Seal Rocks]

The _Seal Rocks_ are two Rocks above Water, lying 1 League and a half
off from the Middle of the West-side of the Island _Miquelon_; the
Passage between them and the Island is very safe, and you have 14 or
15 Fathom within a Cable's Length all round them.

[Sidenote: Green Island.]

This Island which is about three-quarters of a Mile in Circuit, and
low, lies N.E. 5 Miles from St. _Peter_'s, and nearly in the Middle of
the Channel, between it and _Point May_ on _Newfoundland_; on the
South-side of this Island are some Rocks both above and under Water,
extending themselves 1 Mile and a quarter to the S.W.


_Description of_ Fortune Bay.

_Fortune Bay_ is very large, the Entrance is form'd by _Point May_ and
_Pass Island_, which are 12 Leagues N. by E. and S. by W. from each
other, and it is about 23 Leagues deep, wherein are a great many Bays,
Harbours, and Islands.

[Sidenote: Island of Brunet.]

The Island of _Brunet_ is situated nearly in the Middle of the
Entrance into _Fortune Bay_, it is about 5 Leagues in Circuit, and of
a tolerable Height; the East-end appears at some Points of view like
Islands, by reason it is very low and narrow in two Places. On the
N.E. Side of the Island is a Bay, wherein is tolerable good Anchorage
for Ships in 14 and 16 Fathom, shelter'd from Southerly and Westerly
Winds; you must not run too far in for fear of some sunken Rocks in
the Bottom of it, a quarter of a Mile from the Shore; opposite this
Bay on the South-side of the Island, is a small Cove, wherein small
Vessels and Shallops can lay pretty secure from the Weather, in 6
Fathom Water; in the Middle of the Cove is a Rock above Water, and a
Channel on each Side of it. The Islands laying at the West-end of
_Brunet_, called _Little Brunets_, afford indifferent Shelter for
Shallops in blowing Weather; you may approach these Islands, and the
Island of _Brunet_, within a quarter of a Mile all round, there being
no Danger but what lay very near the Shore.

[Sidenote: Plate Islands]

_Plate Islands_ are three Rocks of a moderate Height, lying S.W. 1
League from the West-end of _Great Brunet_. The Southermost and
outermost of these Rocks, lay W. by S. half S. 11 Miles from Cape
_Miquelon_, and in a direct Line between _Point May_ and _Pass
Island_, 17 Miles from the former and 19 from the later; S.E. a
quarter of a Mile from the _Great Plate_ (which is the Northermost) is
a sunken Rock, whereon the Sea breaks, which it the only Danger about
them.

[Sidenote: Observations]

There are several strong and irregular Settings of the Tides or
Currents about the _Plate_ and _Brunet Islands_, which seem to have no
dependency on the Moon, and the Course of the Tides on the Coast.

[Sidenote: Island of Sagona.]

The Island of _Sagona_, which lies N.N.E. 2 Leagues from the East-end
of _Brunet_, is about 3 Miles and a half in circuit, of a moderate
Height, and bold too all round, at the S.W. end is a small Creek that
will admit Fishing Shallops; in the Middle of the Entrance is a sunken
Rock which makes it exceeding narrow, and difficult to get in or out,
except in fine Weather.

[Sidenote: Point May.]

_Point May_ is the Southern Extremity of _Fortune Bay_, and the S.W.
Extremity of this Part of _Newfoundland_; it may be known by a great
black Rock, nearly joining to the Pitch of the Point, and something
higher than the Land, which makes it look like a black Hommock on the
Point; near a quarter of a Mile right off from the Point, or this
round black Rock, are three sunken Rocks, whereon the Sea always
breaks.

[Sidenote: Dantzic Coves.]

Near 2 Miles North from _Point May_, is _Little Dantzic Cove_, and
half a Leag. from _Little Dantzic_ is _Great Dantzic Cove_; these
Coves are no Places of safety, being open to the Westerly Winds; the
Land about them is of a moderate Height, bold too, and clear of Wood.

[Sidenote: Fortune.]

From _Dantzic Point_ (which is the North Point of the Coves) to
_Fortune_ the Course is N.E. near 3 Leagues; the Land between them
near the Shore is of a moderate Height, and bold too; you will have in
most Places 10 and 12 Fathom two Cables Length from the Shore, 30 and
40 one Mile off, and 70 and 80 two Miles off. _Fortune_ lies North
from the East-end of _Brunet_, it is a Bar Place that will admit
Fishing Boats at a quarter Flood; and a Fishing Village situated in
the Bottom of a small Bay, wherein is Anchorage for Shipping in 6, 8,
10, and 12 Fathom; the Ground is none of the best, and you lay open to
near half the Compass.

[Sidenote: Grand Bank.]

[Sidenote: Great Garnish.]

[Sidenote: Frenchman's Cove.]

[Sidenote: Anchorage.]

Cape of _Grand Bank_ is a pretty high Point, lying 1 League N.E. from
_Fortune_; into the E. ward of the Cape is _Ship Cove_, wherein is
good Anchorage for Shipping, in 8 and 10 Fathom, shelter'd from
Southerly, Westerly, and N.W. Winds. _Grand Bank_ lies E.S.E. half a
League from the Cape, it is a Fishing Village, and a Bar Harbour, that
will admit Fishing Shallops at a quarter Flood; to this Place and
_Fortune_ resort the Crews of Fishing Ships, who lay their Ships up
in Harbour _Briton_. From the Cape of _Grand Bank_ to Point _Enragee_,
the Course is NE. a quarter E. 8 Leagues, forming a Bay between them,
in which the Shore is low with several sandy Beaches, behind which are
Bar Harbours that will admit Boats on the Tide of Flood, the largest
of which is _Great Garnish_, 5 Leagues from _Grand Bank_, it may be
known by several Rocks above Water laying before it, 2 Miles from the
Shore, the outmost of these Rocks are steep too, but between them and
the Shore are dangerous sunken Rocks. To the Eastward, and within
these Rocks is _Frenchman's Cove_, wherein you may Anchor with small
Vessels, in 4 and 5 Fathom Water, tolerably well shelter'd from the
Sea Winds, and seems a convenient Place for the Cod Fishery: The
Passage in is to the Eastward of the Rocks that are the highest above
Water; between them and some other lower Rocks laying off to the
Eastward from the East Point of the _Cove_, there is a sunken Rock
nearly in the Middle of this Passage, which you must be aware of. You
may Anchor any where under the Shore, between _Grand Bank_ and _Great
Garnish_ in 8 and 10 Fathom Water, but you are only shelter'd from the
Land Winds.

[Sidenote: Point Enragee.]

_Point Enragee_ is but low, but a little way in the Country is high
Land; this Point may be known by two Hommocks upon it close to the
Shore, but you must be very near, otherwise the Elevation of the high
Lands will hinder you from discovering them; close to the Point is a
Rock under Water.

From _Point Enragee_ to the Head of the Bay, the Course is first N.E.
a quarter E. 3 Leagues to _Grand Jervey_; then N.E. by E. half E. 7
Leagues and a half to the Head of the Bay; the Land in general along
the South-side is high, bold too, and of an uneven Height, with Hills
and Vallies of various extent; the Vallies for the most Part cloathed
with Wood, and water'd with small Rivulets.

[Sidenote: Bay L'Arjent.]

Seven Leagues to the Eastward of _Point Enragee_, is the Bay
_L'Argent_, wherein you may Anchor in 30 or 40 Fathom Water, shelter'd
from all Winds.

[Sidenote: Harbour Millee.]

The Entrance of Harbour _Millee_ is to the Eastward of the East Point
of _L'Argent_; before this Harbour and the Bay _L'Argent_ is a
remarkable Rock, that at a Distance appears like a Shallop under Sail.
_Harbour Millee_ branches into two Arms, one laying into the N.E. and
the other towards the E. at the upper Part of both is good Anchorage,
and various Sorts of Wood. Between this Harbour and _Point Enragee_,
are several Bar Harbours in small Bays, wherein are sandy Beaches, off
which Vessels may Anchor, but they must be very near the Shore to be
in a moderate Depth of Water.

[Sidenote: Cape Millee.]

_Cape Millee_ lies N.N.E. half E. 1 League from the afore-mentioned
_Shallop Rock_, and near 3 Leagues from the Head of _Fortune Bay_ is a
high reddish barren Rock. The wedth of _Fortune Bay_ at _Cape Millee_
doth not exceed half a League, but immediately below it, it is twice
as wide, by which this Cape may be easily known; above this Cape the
Land on both Sides is high, with steep craggy Cliffs. The Head of the
Bay is terminated by a low Beach, behind which is a large Pond or Bar
Harbour, into which Boats can go at quarter Flood. In this and all the
Bar Harbours between it and _Grand Bank_, are convenient Places for
building of Stages, and good Beaches for drying of Fish, for great
Numbers of Boats.

[Sidenote: Grand L'Pierre Harbour]

_Grand L'Pierre_ is a good Harbour, situated on the North-side of the
Bay, half a League from the Head, you can see no Entrance until you
are abreast of it; there is not the least Danger in going in, and you
may Anchor in any Depth from 8 to 4 Fathom, shelter'd from all Winds.

[Sidenote: English Harbour.]

_English Harbour_ lies a little to the Westward of _Grand L'Pierre_,
it is very small, and fit only for Boats and small Vessels.

[Sidenote: Little Bay de Leau.]

To the Westward of _English Harbour_ is a small Bay called _Little Bay
de Leau_, wherein are some small Islands, behind which is shelter for
small Vessels.

[Sidenote: New Harbour]

This Harbour is situated opposite _Cape Millee_, to the Westward of
_Bay de Leau_; it is but a small Inlet, yet hath good Anchorage on the
West-side in 9, 8, 7, and 5 Fathom Water, sheltered from the S.W.
Winds.

[Sidenote: Harbour Femme.]

Harbour _Femme_, which lies half a League to the Westward of _New
Harbour_, lies in NE. half a League, it is very narrow, and hath in it
23 Fathom Water, before the Entrance is an Island, near to which are
some Rocks above Water: the Passage into the Harbour is to the
Eastward of the Island.

[Sidenote: Brewer's Hole.]

One League to the Westward of _Harbour Femme_, is a small Cove called
_Brewer's Hole_, wherein is Shelter for Fishing Boats; before this
Cove is a small Island near the Shore, and some Rocks above Water.

[Sidenote: Harbour la Conte.]

This Harbour is situated one Mile to the Westward of _Brewer's Hole_,
before which are two Islands, one without the other; the outermost,
which is the largest is of a tolerable Height, and lies in a Line with
the Coast, and is not easy to be distinguished from the Main in
sailing along the Shore. To sail into this Harbour, the best Passage
is on the West-side of the outer Island, and between the two; as soon
as you begin to open the Harbour, you must keep the inner Island close
on Board, in order to avoid some sunken Rocks that lay near a small
Island, which you will discover between the NE. Point of the outer
Island, and the opposite Point on the Main; and likewise another Rock
under Water, which lays higher up on the Side of the Main; this Rock
appears at Low Water. As soon as you are above these Dangers, you may
steer up in the middle of the Channel, until you open a fine spacious
Bason, wherein you may Anchor in any Depth from 5 to 17 Fathom Water,
shut up from all Winds, the Bottom is Sand and Mud. In to the Eastward
of the outer Island, is a small Cove fit for small Vessels and Boats,
and Conveniencies for the Fishery.

[Sidenote: Long Harbour.]

This Harbour lies 4 Miles to the Westward of Harbour _La Conte_, and
N.E. by N. 5 Leagues from _Point Enragee_; it may be known by a small
Island in the Mouth of it, called _Gull Island_; and half a Mile
without this Island, is a Rock above Water, that hath the Appearance
of a small Boat. There is a Passage into the Harbour on each Side of
the Island, but the broadest is the Westermost. Nearly in the middle
of this Passage, a little without the Island is a Ledge of Rocks,
whereon is two Fathom Water; a little within the Island on the S.E.
Side are some sunken Rocks, about two Cables length from the Shore
laying off two sandy Coves; some of these Rocks appear at Low-water.
On the N.W. Side of the Harbour, two Miles within the Island is
_Morgan's Cove_, wherein you may Anchor in 15 Fathom Water, and the
only Place you can Anchor, unless you run into, or above the
_Narrows_, being every where else very deep Water. This Harbour runs
five Leagues into the Country, at the Head of which is a Salmon
Fishery.

[Sidenote: Bell Bay, and its contain'd Bays & Harbours.]

[Sidenote: Hare Harbours.]

A little to the Westward of _Long Harbour_, is _Bell Bay_, which
extends three Leagues every Way, and contains several Bays and
Harbours. On the East Point of this Bay, is _Hare Harbour_, which is
fit only for small Vessels and Boats, before which are two small
Islands, and some Rocks above and under Water.

[Sidenote: Mall Bay.]

Two Miles to the Northward of _Hare Harbour_, or the Point of _Bell
Bay_, is _Mall Bay_, being a narrow Arm, laying in NE. by N. 5 Miles,
wherein is deep Water, and no Anchorage until at the Head.

[Sidenote: Rencontre Islands.]

_Rencontre Islands_ lies to the Westward of _Mall Bay_, near the
Shore; the Westermost, which is the largest, hath a Communication with
the Main at low Water; in and about this Island are shelter for small
Vessels and Boats.

[Sidenote: Bell Harbour]

_Bell Harbour_ lies one League to the Westward of _Rencontre_ Islands:
The Passage into the Harbour is on the West Side of the Island; in the
Mouth of it, as soon as you are within the Island, you will open a
small Cove on the E. Side, wherein small Vessels anchor, but large
Ships must run up to the Head of the Harbour, and Anchor in 20 Fathom
Water, there being most Room.

[Sidenote: Lally Cove.]

_Lally Cove_ lies a little to the Westward of _Bell Harbour_, it is a
very snug Place for small Vessels, being covered from all Winds behind
the Island in the Cove.

[Sidenote: Lally Cove. Back Cove.]

_Lally Head_ is the West Point of _Lally Cove_, it is a high bluff
white Point; to the Northward of the Head is _Lally Cove back Cove_,
wherein you may anchor in 16 Fathom Water.

[Sidenote: Bay of the East, and Bay of the North.]

Two Miles to the Northward of _Lally Cove Head_, is the Bay of the
East, and Bay of the North, in both is deep Water, and no Anchorage,
unless very near the Shore. At the Head of the North Bay is the
largest River in _Fortune Bay_, and seems a good Place for a Salmon
Fishery.

[Sidenote: Bay of Cinq Isles.]

The Bay of _Cinq Isles_ lies to the Southward of the North Bay, and
opposite to _Lally Cove Head_ there is tolerable good Anchorage for
large Ships on the S.W. Side of the Islands in the Bottom of the Bay.
The North Arm is a very snug Place for small Vessels; at the Head of
this Arm is a Salmon River.

[Sidenote: Corben Bay.]

A little to the Southward of the Bay of _Cinq_ Isles is _Corben Bay_,
wherein is good Anchorage for any Ships in 22 or 24 Fathom Water.

[Sidenote: Bell & Dog Islands.]

South East about two Miles from _Lally Cove Head_, are two Islands
about a Mile from each other, the North Eastermost is called _Bell
Island_, and the other _Dog Island_, they are of a tolerable Height,
and bold too all round.

Between _Dogg Island_, and _Lord and Lady Island_, which lies off the
S. Point of _Corben Bay_, is a sunken Rock, (somewhat nearer to _Lord
and Lady_, than _Dogg-Island_) whereon the Sea breaks in very bad
Weather, and every where round it very deep Water. About a quarter of
a Mile to the Northward of the North-end of _Lord and Lady_ Island, is
a Rock that appears at low Water.

[Sidenote: Bande de La'rier Bay and Harbour.]

_Bande de La'rier_ Bay lies on the West Point of _Bell Bay_, and NNW.
half W. near 3 Leagues from Point _Enragee_, it may be known by a very
high Mountain over the Bay, which rises almost perpendicular from the
Sea, called _Iron-Head_. _Chappel Island_, which forms the East-side
of the Bay is high Land also. The Harbour lies on the West-side of the
Bay, just within the Point, formed by a narrow low Beach, it is very
small, but a snug Place, and conveniently situated for the _Cod
Fishery_. There is a tolerable good Anchorage along the West Side of
the Bay from the Harbour up towards _Iron Head_ in 18 and 20 Fathom
Water.

[Sidenote: Bande de La'rier Bank.]

The Bank of _Bande de La'rier_, whereon is not less than 7 Fathom,
lies with the Beach of _Bande de Lourier_ Harbour, just open of the
West Point of the Bay, and _Boxy Point_ on with the North End of St.
_Jaques_ Island.

[Sidenote: St. Jaques.]

Two Miles to the W. ward of _Bande de La'rier_, is the Harbour of St.
_Jaques_, which may be easily known by the Island before it. This
Island is high at each End, and low in the Middle, and at a Distance
looks like two Islands, it lies N. 30d. E. 8 and a half Leagues from
the Cape of _Grand Bank_, and N. E. by E. 7 Leagues from the East-end
of _Brunet_. The Passage into the Harbour is on the West Side of the
Island; there is not the least Danger in going in, or in any Part of
the Harbour; you may anchor in any Depth from 17 to 4 Fathom.

[Sidenote: Blue Pinion.]

Two Miles to the Westward of St. _Jaques_, is the Harbour of _Blue
Pinion_, it is not near so large, or so safe as that of St. _Jaques_;
near to the Head of the Harbour on the West Side is a Shoal, whereon
is two Fathom at Low Water.

[Sidenote: English Cove]

A little to the Westward of _Blue Pinion_, is _English Cove_, which is
very small, wherein small Vessels and Boats can Anchor; before it, and
very near the Shore is a small Island.

[Sidenote: Boxy point.]

_Boxy_ Point lies SW. by W. a quarter W. two Leagues and a half from
St. _Jaques_ Island, NNE. near 7 Leagues from the Cape of _Grand
Bank_, and NE. half E. 13 Miles from the East End of _Brunet_ Island;
it is of a moderate Height, the most advanced to the Southward of any
Land on the Coast, and may be distinguished at a considerable
Distance; there are some sunken Rocks off it, but they lay very near
the Shore, and are no ways dangerous.

[Sidenote: Boxy Harbour.]

NNE. three Miles from _Boxey_ Point is the Harbour of _Boxy_; to sail
into it you must keep _Boxy_ Point just open of _Fryer's_ Head (a
black Head a little within the Point) in this Direction you will keep
in the middle of the Channel between the Shoals which lay off from
each Point of the Harbour, where the Stages are; as soon as you are
within these Shoals, which cover you from the Sea Winds, you may
anchor in 5 and 4 Fathom Water, fine sandy Ground.

[Sidenote: St. John's Island, Head, Bay and Harbour.]

West 1 Mile from _Boxy_ Point is the Island of St. _John_'s, which is
of a tollerable Height, and steep too, except at the N.E. Point, where
is a Shoal a little way off.

N.W. half a League from St. _John_'s _Island_ is St. _John_'s _Head_,
which is a high, steep, craggy Point. Between St _John_'s _Head_ and
_Boxy Point_, is St. _John_'s _Bay_, in the Bottom of which is St.
_John_'s _Harbour_, wherein is only Water for Boats.

[Sidenote: Gull and Shag.]

On the North-side of St. _John_'s _Head_ are two rocky Islands, called
the _Gull_ and _Shag_; at the West-end of these Islands are some
sunken Rocks.

[Sidenote: Great Bay de Leau.]

One League and a half to the Northward of St. _John_'s _Head_ is the
_Great Bay de Leau_, wherein is good Anchorage in various depths of
Water, sheltered from all Winds. The best Passage in is on the
East-side of the Island, laying in the Mouth of it; nothing can enter
in on the West-side but small Vessels and Shallops.

[Sidenote: Little Bay Barrysway.]

To the Westward of _Bay de Leau_, 3 Miles NNW. from St. _John_'s
_Head_ is _Little Bay Barrysway_, on the West-side of which is good
Anchorage for large Ships in 7, 8, or 10 Fathom Water; here is good
Fishing Conveniencies, with plenty of Wood and Water.

[Sidenote: Harbour Briton.]

[Sidenote: South West Arm.]

_Harbour Briton_ lies to the Westward of _Little Bay Barrysway_, North
1 Leag. and a half from the Island of _Sagona_, and N. by E. from
East-end of _Brunet_. The two Heads, which from the Entrance of this
Harbour or Bay are pretty high, and lay from each other E.N.E. and
W.S.W. above 2 Miles; near the East Head is a Rock above Water, by
which it may be known: There are no Dangers in going in until you are
the Length of the South Point of the S.W. Arm, which is more than a
Mile within the West Head; from off this Point stretches out a Ledge
of Rocks N.E. about two Cables Length; the only Place for King's Ships
to Anchor is above this Point, before the S.W. Arm in 16 or 18 Fathom
Water, mooring nearly East and West, and so near the Shore as to have
the East Head on with the Point above-mentioned; the Bottom is very
good, and the Place convenient for Wooding and Watering. In the SW.
Arm is Room for a great Number of Merchant Ships, and many
Conveniencies for Fishing Vessels.

[Sidenote: Jerseyman's Harbour.]

Opposite to the S.W. Arm is the N.E. Arm or _Jerseyman_'s _Harbour_,
which is capable of holding a great number of Ships, securely
shelter'd from all Winds. To sail into it you must keep the Point of
_Thompson_'s _Beach_ (which is the Beach Point, at the Entrance into
the S.W. Arm) open of _Jerseyman_'s _Head_, (which is a high bluff
Head at the North Entrance into _Jerseyman_'s _Harbour_) this Mark
will lead you over the Bar in the best of the Channel, where you will
have 3 Fathom at Low-water; as soon as you open the Harbour, haul up
North, and Anchor where its most convenient in 8, 7 or 6 Fathom Water,
good Ground, and shelter'd from all Winds. In this Harbour are several
convenient Places for erecting many Stages, and good Beach room.
_Jerseymen_ generally lay their Ships up in this Harbour, and cure
their Fish at _Fortune_ and _Grand Bank_.

[Sidenote: Gull Island, and Deadman's Bay.]

From Harbour _Briton_ to the W. end of _Brunet_, and to the _Plate
Islands_, the Course is S.W. by S. 6 Leagues and a half to the
Southermost _Plate_. From _Harbour Briton_ to _Cape Miquelon_ is S.W.
a quarter W. 10 Leagues. From the West Head of _Harbour Briton_ to
_Cannaigre Head_, the Course is W. by S. Distant 2 Leagues; between
them are _Gull-Island_ and _Deadman's Bay_. _Gull-Island_ lies close
under the Land, 2 Miles to the Westward of Harbour _Briton_.
_Deadman's Bay_ is to the Westward of _Gull-Island_, wherein you may
Anchor with the Land Winds. Between _Harbour Briton_ and _Cannaigre
Head_, is a Bank stretching off from the Shore between 2 and 3 Miles,
whereon is various Depths of Water from 34 to 4 Fathom. Fishermen say
that they have seen the Sea break in very bad Weather, a good way
without _Gull-Island_.

[Sidenote: Cannaigre Head.]

[Sidenote: Cannaigre Bay.]

[Sidenote: Cannaigre Rocks.]

_Cannaigre Head_ which forms the East Point of the Bay of the same
Name, lies North Easterly 3 Leagues and a half from the West-end of
_Brunet_; it is a high craggy Point, easy to be distinguished from any
Point of view. From this Head to _Basstarre_ Point, the Course is W.
by N. half N. 2 Leagues, and likewise W. by N. half N. 3 Leagues and a
half to the Rocks of _Pass Island_; but to give them a Birth make a W.
by N. Course good. Between _Cannaigre Head_ and _Basstarre Point_ is
_Cannaigre Bay_, which extends itself about 4 Leagues Inland, at the
Head of which is a Salmon River. In the Mouth of the Bay lay the Rocks
of the same Name above Water, you may approach these Rocks very near,
there being no Danger but what discovers itself. The Channel between
them and the North Shore is something Dangerous, by reason of a range
of Rocks which lie along Shore, and extend themselves 1 Mile off.

[Sidenote: Cannaigre Harbour.]

_Cannaigre Harbour_ which is very small, with 7 Fathom Water in it, is
within a Point on the South-side of the Bay, 5 Miles above the Head:
The Passage into the Harbour is on the S.E. Side of the Island, lying
before it. Nearly in the Middle of the Bay, abreast of this Harbour,
are two Islands of a tolerable Height, on the South-side of the
Westermost Island, which is the largest, are some Rocks above Water.

[Sidenote: Dawson's Cove.]

This Cove is on the N.W. Side of the Bay, bears North, Distance about
4 Miles from the Head, and East 2 Miles from the W. end of the _Great
Island_. In it are good Fishing Conveniences, and Anchorage for
Vessels in 6 and 5 Fathom Water, but they will lay open to the
Southerly Winds. Between the S.W. Point of this Cove and _Basstarre
Point_, which is 5 Miles Distance, lays the Range of Rocks
beforementioned.

[Sidenote: Basstarre Point.]

_Basstarre Point_ which forms the West Point of _Cannaigre Bay_, is of
a moderate Height, clear of Wood, and bold too, all the way from it to
_Pass-Island_, which bears N.W. by W. 1 League from _Basstarre Point_.

[Sidenote: Observations.]

The Land on the North-side of _Fortune Bay_ for the most Part is
hilly, rising directly from the Sea, with craggy, barren Hills, which
extends 4 or 5 Leag. Inland, with a great Number of Rivulets and
Ponds. The Land on the South side of _Fortune Bay_, has a different
Appearance to that on the North-side, being not so full of craggy
Mountains, and better cloathed with Woods, which are of a short brushy
kind, which makes the face of the Country look green.

[Sidenote: Pass Island.]

_Pass Island_ lies N. 16Â° 30' East 7 Leagues and a half from _Cape
Miquelon_, it is the N.W. extremity of _Fortune Bay_, and lies very
near the Shore, is more than 2 Miles in circuit and is pretty high. On
the S.W. Side are several Rocks above Water, which extend themselves 1
Mile from the Island, and on the N.W. Side is a sunken Rock at a
quarter of a Mile from the Island; the Passage between this Island and
the Main, which is near two Cables Length wide, is very safe for small
Vessels, wherein you may Anchor in 6 Fathom, a fine sandy Bottom. This
Island is well situated for the Cod Fishery, there being very good
Fishing Ground about it.

[Sidenote: On the Soundings.]

In the Night time, or in foggy Weather, Ships ought to place no great
Dependance on the Soundings in _Fortune Bay_, least they may be
deceived thereby, for you have more Water in many Parts near the
Shore, and in several of its contained Bays and Harbours, than in the
middle of the Bay itself.


Description of _Hermitage Bay_.

From _Pass Island_ to _Great Jervis Harbour_, at the Entrance into the
Bay of _Despair_, the Course is N. by E. a quarter E. near three
Leagues; and from _Pass Island_ to the West End of _Long Island_, the
Course is NNE. 8 Miles, between them is the Bay of _Hermitage_, which
lies in ENE. 8 Leagues from _Pass Island_, with very deep Water in
most Parts of it.

[Sidenote: Fox Islands.]

The two _Fox Islands_, which are but small, lie nearly in the middle
of _Hermitage Bay_, 3 Leagues and a half from _Pass Island_; near to
these Islands is good Fishing Ground.

[Sidenote: Hermitage Cove.]

_Hermitage Cove_ is on the South-side of the Bay, opposite to _Fox's
Islands_. To sail into it, you must keep between the Islands and the
South Shore, where there is not the least Danger; in this Cove is good
Anchorage for Shipping in 8 and 10 Fathom Water, and good Fishing
Conveniences, with plenty of Wood and Water.

[Sidenote: Long Island.]

_Long Island_, which separates the Bay of _Despair_ from _Hermitage_,
is of a triangular Form, about 8 Leagues in Circuit, of a tolerable
Height, is hilly, uneven and barren. The East Entrance into the Bay of
_Despair_ from _Hermitage Bay_, is by the West-end of _Long Island_;
about half a Mile from the S.W. Point of the said Island, are two
Rocks above Water, with deep Water all round them.

[Sidenote: Long Island Harbour.]

This Harbour lies on the South-side of _Long Island_, 2 Miles and a
half from the West-end; before which is an Island, and several Rocks
above Water, there is a narrow Passage into the Harbour on each Side
of the Island; this Harbour is formed by two Arms, one laying into the
North, and the other to the Eastward; they are both very narrow, and
have in them from 42 to 7 Fathom Water; the East Arm is the deepest,
and the best Anchorage.

[Sidenote: Round Harbour.]

This Harbour, wherein is 6 Fathom Water, lies near 2 Miles to the E.
ward of _Long Island Harbour_, is also in _Long-Island_; it will only
admit very small Vessels, by reason the Channel going in is very
narrow.

[Sidenote: Picarre.]

_Harbour Picarre_ lies N. by W. half a League from _Little Fox
Island_, (which is the Westermost of _Fox Islands_) to sail into it
you must keep near the West-point to avoid some sunken Rocks off the
other, and anchor in the first Cove on the East-side in 9 or 10
Fathom, sheltered from all Winds.

[Sidenote: Galtaus.]

This Harbour, which is but small, lies near the East-point of
_Long-Island_; at the Entrance is several rocky Islands. The best
Channel into the Harbour is on the West-side of these Islands, wherein
is 4 Fathom Water, but in the harbour is from 15 to 24 Fathom. Here
are several Places proper for erecting of Stages; and both this
Harbour and _Picarre_ are conveniently situated for a Fishery, they
laying contiguous to the Fishing Ground about _Fox Islands_.

[Sidenote: Passage of Long Island]

Between the East-end of _Long Island_ and the Main, is a very good
Passage out of _Hermitage Bay_, into the Bay of _Despair_.


Description of the Bay of _Despair_.

The Entrance of the Bay of _Despair_ lies between the West-end of
_Long Island_ and _Great Jervis Island_, (an Island in the Mouth of
the Harbour of the same Name) the Distance from one to the other is 1
Mile and a Quarter, and in the Middle between them is no Soundings
with 280 Fathoms.

[Sidenote: Great Jervis Island.]

_Great Jervis Harbour_ is situated at the West Entrance into the Bay
of _Despair_ is a snug and safe Harbour, with good Anchorage in every
Part of it, in 16, 18 or 20 Fathom, though but small will contain a
great Number of Shipping, securely sheltered from all Winds, and very
convenient for wooding and watering. There is a Passage into this
Harbour on either Side of _Great Jervis Island_, the southermost is
the safest, there being in it no Danger but the Shore itself. To sail
in on the North-side of the Island, you must keep in the middle of the
Passage, until you are within two small Rocks above Water near to each
other on your Starboard-side, a little within the North Point of the
Passage; you must then bring the said North Point between these Rocks,
and steer into the Harbour, in that Directions will carry you clear of
some sunken Rocks which lie off the West Point of the Island; these
Rocks appear at Low-water. The Entrance into this Harbour may be known
by the East-end of _Great Jervis Island_, which is a high steep craggy
Point, called _Great Jervis Head_, and is the North Point of the South
Entrance into the Harbour.

[Sidenote: North Bay.]

This is an Arm of the Bay of _Despair_, which extends to the Northward
5 Leagues from _Great Jervis Island_. In this Bay is very deep Water,
and no Anchorage but in the small Bays and Coves which are on each
Side of it. At the Head of the Bay of the East, which is an Arm of the
North Bay, is a very fine Salmon River, and plenty of various Sorts of
Wood.

[Sidenote: Eagle Island.]

To the Northward of _Long Island_, the Bay of _Despair_ extends itself
to the NE. about 8 Leagues, whereon are several Arms and Islands. The
first is _Eagle Island_ laying on the North-side of _Long Island_,
about half a Cable's Length from the Shore; a little to the Eastward
of it is a small Cove, wherein small Vessels can Anchor in 5 Fathom
Water; off the E. Point of this Cove are some sunken Rocks, the
outermost of which lay a quarter of a Mile from the Shore, and appears
at half Ebb.

[Sidenote: Frenchman's Harbour.]

This harbour lies on the North-side of _Long Island_, 2 Miles above
_Eagle Island_, in and before which Vessels may anchor in various
Depths of Water; about a Cable's length to the Eastward of the West
Point of the Harbour is a sunken Rock whereon is 8 Feet Water; a
little way further to the Eastward is a small Island not far from the
Shore, near to which is a Rock that just Covers at high Water.

[Sidenote: Isle Bois.]

On the North-side of the Bay, opposite to _Long Island_, lies the
_Isle Bois_, it is near 3 Leagues in Length, and of a tolerable
Height; the Passage on the North-side of it (called _Lampadois_
Passage) is very safe, but very deep Water.

[Sidenote: Fox Island.]

This Island lies nearly in the middle of the Bay, between the East-end
of the Isle of _Bois_ and _Long Island_, it is of a round Form, pretty
high, and bold too all round.

[Sidenote: Isle Riches.]

The _Isle Riches_ lies off the East-end of the Isle of _Bois_, it is
about a Mile in Circuit, and pretty high; on the East-side of it are
some small Islands, and some sunken Rocks quite a-cross from the
Island to the Main, so that in sailing up the Bay of _Despair_, you
must leave this Island on your Starboard-side.

[Sidenote: Little River.]

This is an Arm of the Bay laying in to the Eastward from the Isle of
_Riches_, it is very narrow, and counted a good Place for a Salmon
Fishery; its Banks are stored with various Sorts of Wood.

[Sidenote: Bay Rotte.]

This is a small Bay which lays North from the East-end of the Isle of
_Bois_, in which are some sunken Rocks near the Head.

[Sidenote: Bay of Conne.]

From the Isle of _Riches_ the Bay extends itself to the Northward
about five Miles, commonly called the Bay or River of _Conne_, then
branches into two Arms, one still tending to the North, and the other
to the Eastward; the Water is very shallow for some Distance from the
Head of both. About these Arms, and the Bay of _Conne_, are great
Plenty of all Sorts of Wood, common to this Country, such as Firr,
Pine, Birch, Witch-Hasle, Spruce, _&c._

[Sidenote: Observations.]

All the Country about the Entrance into the Bay of _Despair_, and for
a good Way up it is very mountainous and barren, but about the Head of
the Bay it appears to be pretty level, and well cloathed with Wood.

[Sidenote: On the Tides.]

Between St. _Laurence_ and Point _May_, an ESE. Moon makes high Water
at the Islands of St. _Peters_ and _Miquelon_, and in all Parts of
_Fortune Bay_ a S.E. Moon makes High Water. In the Bay of _Despair_ a
SE. by S. Moon makes High Water; in all which Places it flows up and
down, or upon a perpendicular Spring Tides 7 or 8 Feet; but it must be
observed that they are every where greatly governed by the Winds and
Weather.

[Sidenote: Currents.]

The Currents on the Sea Coasts from Cape _Chapeaurouge_ towards St.
_Peter's_, sets generally to the SW. On the South-side of _Fortune
Bay_ it sets to the Eastward, and on the North-side to the Westward.

[Sidenote: Winds.]

The South West, and Westerly Winds generally blow in the Day during
the Summer, and about the Evening they die away; and in the Night you
have Land Breezes or Calms.




       *       *       *       *       *



    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                      |
    |                                                              |
    | Page  5: sefety replaced with safety                         |
    | Page  6: Leagus replaced with League                         |
    | Page  8: Dantzc Poinit replaced with Dantzic Point           |
    | Page  8: Shiping replaced with Shipping                      |
    | Page 11: In the sidenote, Recontre replaced with Rencontre   |
    | Page 12: Larier replaced with La'rier                        |
    | Page 15: In the sidenote, Cannaigree replaced with Cannaigre |
    | Page 18: aud replaced with and                               |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+

